# AJAX, fetch, and Axios

## HTTP Requests in the Browser
- URL Bar
- Links
- JavaScript
  - `window.location.href = 'http://www.google.com'`
- Submitting forms: `GET/POST`

All the above make the browser navigate and retrieve new documents
- Often times for each of the above actions, views are stored on the server and served up as HTML pages
- When a user goes to a new page, browser navigates in totality, refreshing and retrieving a brand new HTML document
- Each page, since it's a new page, retrieves stylesheets, scripts, files, etc

## What is AJAX?
- "Asynchronous JavaScript And XML"
- Making background HTTP requests using JavaScript
- Handling the response of those HTTP requests with JavaScript
- No page refresh necessary
- `window.fetch()`

## Asynchronous JS
- JavaScript's ability to act in a non-blocking manner
- Imagine if every network request that took time to give us a response blocked any other operations from executing
- The initial method developed to deal with asynchronous code was to use callbacks to provide a function to run once a request has been resolved
- The following code snippet is an example of a callback being used to deal with the result of the async downloadPhoto function:
```javascript
downloadPhoto('http://coolcats.com/cat.gif', handlePhoto)

function handlePhoto (error, photo) {
  if (error) console.error('Download error!', error)
  else console.log('Download finished', photo)
}

console.log('Download started')
```
- Callbacks can be annoying
- <http://callbackhell.com>

## Why AJAX?
- AJAX allows us to build Single Page Applications (SPAs)
- An SPA is a web application or website that interacts with the user by dynamically rewriting the current page rather than loading entire new pages from the server (Wikipedia)
- SPAs mean no reload or refresh within the user interface
  - JS manipulates the DOM as the user interacts
- User experience similar to a native/mobile application

## Wait, what is `fetch()`?
- The Fetch API provides an interface for fetching resources (including across the network).
- Provides a generic definition of Request and Response objects, as well as other things involved with network requests
- The `fetch()` method takes one mandatory argument, the path to the resource you want to fetch, and returns a promise that resolves to the response to that request (successful or not).
- You can optionally pass an init options object as second argument (used to configure req headers for other types of HTTP requests such as `PUT`, `POST`, `DELETE`)

## Using `fetch()`
```javascript
fetch('http://example.com/movies.json')
  .then(function(response){
    return response.json();
  })
  .then(function(myJson) {
    console.log(JSON.stringify(myJson));
  })
```
The simpest use of fetch takes one argument - the path to the resource you want to fetch - and returns a promise containing the response body.

Above, we are fetching a JSON file across the network to print to the console.

## What is Axios?
- Axios is a promise-based HTTP client for JavaScript. It allows you to:
  - Make XMLHttpRequests from the browser
  - Make HTTP requests from node.js
  - Supports the Promise API
  - Automatic transforms for JSON data

## Using Axios
```javascript
axios.get('http://jsonplaceholder.typicode.com/todos')
  .then(function (response){
    resultElement.innerHTML = generateSuccessHTMLOutput(response);
  })
  .catch(function (error){
    resultElement.innerHTML = generateErrorHTMLOutput(error);
  });
```
- Above, we are using the `axios.get(<uri>)` function to send an HTTP GET request to the endpoint that we want to get information from
- Axios provides more functoin to make other network requests as well, matching the HTTP verbs that you wish to execute, such as:
  - `axios.post(<uri>, <payload>)`
  - `axios.put(<uri>, <payload>)`
  - `axios.delete(<uri>, <payload>)`
- You can also pass a config object instead:
```javascript
axios({
    method: 'get',
    url: 'http://dummy.data'
    responseType: '<insert response type, e.g. stream>'
})
```
- In order to use Axios, you can simply `npm install axios` in your project and either import or require it to use.

## Fetch vs Axios
- Fetch API is built into the window object, and therefore doesn't need to be installed as a dependency or imported in the client-side code.
- Axios need to be installed as a dependency. However, it automaticall transforms JSON data for you, thereby avoiding the two-step process of making a `.fetch()` request and then a second call to the `.json()` methon on the response.
- There is a good Medium article outlining some more differences [here](https://medium.com/@thejasonfile/fetch-vs- axios-js-for-making-http-requests-2b261cdd3af5).
